# Homelab

The configuration of my home infrastructure.

## Laptop

My main laptop, a Lenovo X230, runs [NixOS](https://nixos.org/).

Its configuration is specified in `x230.nix` using the [experimental flakes
feature](https://www.tweag.io/blog/2020-07-31-nixos-flakes/).  Modify this file
and switch to the new configuration:

    sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .

By default, this configuration is stored in `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.

For testing purposes you can build a QEMU virtual machine from the configuration:

    nixos-rebuild build-vm --flake .

To update the lock files:

    nix flake update --update-input nixpkgs --commit-lock-file

## Servers

The entrypoint for my home server setup is [home.nix](home.nix).  This
configuration is deployed using [nixops](https://github.com/NixOS/nixops).  A
one-time setup is required if the deployment doesn't exist yet:

    nix develop -c nixops create --name home --flake .

Then, run the following command to deploy:

    nix develop -c nixops deploy

This builds the system configurations locally and copies the resulting closures
to the remote machines.

## Installing a new NixOS system

Installing a new system takes only a few manual steps.

Create a customized installer ISO image using the command mentioned at the top
of [installer/iso.nix](installer/iso.nix).

Copy the ISO image to a USB stick and boot the computer from it.  Connect to
the installer using SSH:

    ssh root@nixos -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o 'UserKnownHostsFile /dev/null'

Execute the relevant lines from [/etc/install.sh](installer/install.sh) to
partition the disk and create file systems.

Use the basic configuration from
[/etc/configuration.nix](installer/configuration.nix) as default and set the
hostname.

Run the installer then reboot the machine.  The installation of the basic
system is done.

Continue the systems's management using NixOps.


### Useful commands

The configuration.nix(5) man page documents all the available options for configuring the system:

    man configuration.nix

All supported options are searchable online:

    https://nixos.org/nixos/options.html

Query available packages:

    nix search nixpkgs wget

[Install a package](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_command/profile_install) into the user's profile

    nix profile install nixpkgs#firefox

Remove old, unreferenced packages, system-wide:

    sudo nix-collect-garbage
    sudo nix-collect-garbage -d  # also delete old system old configurations

This is documented in the [Cleaning the Nix Store](https://nixos.org/nixos/manual/index.html#sec-nix-gc)
section of the NixOS manual.

The builtin functions of the Nix evaulator:

    https://nixos.org/nix/manual/#ssec-builtins

## Router

Linksys WRT ACM-3200 running OpenWRT.

### First time setup

Connect to the router with an Ethernet cable.

Download and install the firmware from https://openwrt.org/toh/linksys/linksys_wrt3200acm then run:

    router/setup.sh --first-time

Reboot the router.

### Customizations

Change the settings in `router/config` and run

    router/setup.sh

## Raspberry Pi 3 Model B

### Raspbian

Setup SD card:

    wget https://downloads.raspberrypi.org/raspbian_lite_latest
    unzip -p raspbian_lite_latest | sudo dd of=/dev/mmcblk0 bs=4M conv=fsync status=progress
    # remove then reinsert SD card
    pmount /dev/mmcblk0p1
    touch /media/mmcblk0p1/ssh
    pumount /dev/mmcblk0p1

### NixOS

The official NixOS images boot without any problems.  Download the latest
aarch64 SD card image from
[Hydra](https://hydra.nixos.org/search?query=sd_image).

Flash the image to an SD card as described in the [previous section](#raspbian).

Boot the system then start an SSH server and set a temporary password for the
root user:

    systemctl start sshd
    passwd root

The password is only used for the first time access.  Password authentication
will be disabled later.  Connect to the freshly booted system using SSH.

To enable crosss-compilation from an amd64 system add the following block to
the the Pi's NixOS module:

```nix
nixpkgs.crossSystem.system = "aarch64-linux";
```

Enable some Raspberry Pi specific arguments in the [hardware
specification](hardware/rp3.nix) and use NixOps as usual.

## NodeMCU

I have a couple of NodeMCU boards which can be configured using the scripts in the [nodemcu](nodemcu) directory.

Enter a Nix shell
```
$ cd nodemcu
$ nix-shell
```

In this shell the following helper functions are available.

Erase everything from the device and start from scratch:

* `flash_erase`: Perform Chip Erase on SPI flash
* `flash_write`: Write the [Tasmota firmware](https://github.com/arendst/Tasmota) to the device

Open an interactive serial terminal:

    serial_terminal

Restore the firmware's factory settings:

    device_reset | commit

Configure a device

    device_config <WIFI_SSID> <WIFI_KEY> | commit

These commands are defined as [shell hooks in shell.nix](./nodemcu/shell.nix)

### Provisioning

The best way I found to provision the ESP8266 systems with custom firmware is
through MQTT because it's not always easy to get access to a serial terminal.

Use the serial console or the web interface to connect the device to the WiFi
and to the MQTT broker.

Built and run the [provisioning script](nodemcu/provision.nix):

    nix build -f provision.nix && ./result

This will reconfigure all the devices by executing the specified
[commands](https://tasmota.github.io/docs/Commands/).
